Yeah, it is. She did a good job. Okay, this is Ron
Shoring in Kingsville, Texas, interviewing Don
Yeomans. Don, for the record, what's your name and
date and place of birth? Donald Keith Yeomans. I
was born in Rochester, New York, May 3, 1942. How'd
you get interested in astronomy? Well, I don't
think it started until I was... halfway through my
undergraduate career at the Middlebury College
in Vermont. And I took an undergraduate course in
astronomy from my professor, who turned out to be
very contagious and his enthusiasm for
astronomy. I think it started there, really. So I
had been taking math as an undergraduate and have a
math major. But I took a number of physics courses
after that and astronomy, and then went on the
University of Maryland to do graduate school
work. Why did you pick Maryland? Well, they had an
excellent program.
I interviewed with a number of schools, but
Maryland had an excellent program. They offered
me more money, and they were one of the closer
schools to where I was living in Rochester.
What was your specialty in, I mean your specialty
is commons now, but was it when you were grad
student? At the University of Maryland we were,
everyone took a lot of radio astronomy,
astrophysics, solar astronomy,
almost everything except what I finally wound up
in, which was dynamical astronomy. So we had a very
broad background in most of the astronomical
subjects. My dynamical work really was done by
Peter Musen at the Goddard Space Flight Center,
who was sort of an adjunct professor at the
University of Maryland, and he taught a number of
us several years of dynamical astronomy. What was
your thesis on? It was on the non-gravitational
forces on the comets. Jacques Beniziner was the
example I used. But I developed numerical
integration routines and differential
correction routines to determine the cometary
orbits. and including the so-called
non-gravitational effects, which had recently
been detected by Brian Martin in the motions of
many of his comments. Well, they weren't recently
detected. Actually, they were detected way back
when. Ain't thinking. But Brian had recently
modeled those in a fairly comprehensive fashion.
So I used that model and then predicted some meteor
showers for that particular comet. The
draconids, of course, meteor showers are
associated with that kind of thing. So I went back
and investigated the circumstances of the
previous shower phenomena and went ahead and made
predictions for the future. How did they turn out?
Well, predicting meteor showers is a whole lot
different than predicting the return of the
continents. We thought there would be quite a
substantial shower in 1955.
There was not. Almost exactly a century after the
failure of 1865. Yeah. So I have since gotten away
from meteor shower prediction, pretty much, and
stuck with trying to predict the motions in the
last two weeks of college. When did you, by the way,
when did you get your bachelor's and when did you
get your PhD? I got the master's in 1967 and the PhD
in 1970 at the University
of Maryland. Where did you then go to work after you
got your degree? Even as a graduate student, I was
doing some work at the Goddard Space Flight
Center, which is very close to the University of
Maryland, of course. Again, working with Peter
Musen doing some computations. And after
graduating from the University of Maryland, I
actually had a job briefly with the Bendix Field
Engineering Corporation. They were contracting
with Goddard. And later, with Computer Sciences
Corporation, again, contracting for Goddard.
And at both places, I was really working Bob
Farquhar, who now is at the Applied Physics Lab,
but his interest then, and in fact now, is fly-by
missions to comets and asteroids. And so I started
off working in the field that I'd been trained in,
which is sort of unusual. And I've been doing the
motions of comets and asteroids primarily for for
mission analysis work and mission planning ever
since. After those couple of short stints, where
did you go? In 1976, I was asked by Lou Friedman to
come out to the Depth Propulsion Laboratory,
which I did, and I've been there ever since. Do you
think planetary astronomy is real astronomy? or
planetary science? Well, I certainly do, yes. But
I think your question derives from the fact that
the majority of the astronaut community probably
doesn't feel that way. I was going to ask you that.
That's certainly been the universal, I've
interviewed 30 people in the whole 30 degrees. Do
you think, in the time since you've been in the
field,
the situation has gotten better and planetary
astronomy has a better holder among stellar and
galactic astronomers than you see? I think it
does, yes. And why? Well, I was just going to say,
primarily because of NASA and the exploration,
planetary exploration program within NASA.
Planetary astronomy very much holds its own,
especially with Well, but the perception, I
think, is strong. I think it's at least an equal
footing now.
And perhaps I just want a little bit to quote the
monetary strongest side, at least from my very
biased point of view. When you were getting
started, did you feel inferior to, say, people who
observed the 200-inch galaxy? My background
really was not smack in the middle of planetary
astronomy. It was sort of halfway between
planetary astronomy and dynamical astronomy. So
I never had the impression that I was inferior to
the stellar astronomers because I never
considered myself a traditional astronomer in
the first place. My discipline was halfway
between planetary astronomy and dynamical
astronomy. So I really never had that perception
or that feeling. Here's a question that I know you
know the answer to, and I do too. But it seems that in
the 20s, 30s, and 40s, when very little serious
astrophysics was done in the solar system, the
comets were immune for this. The cometary papers
would appear in the anthrax. Is that, am I correct
in saying that? Yeah, I think that's true. There
was some excellent work done by spectroscopists,
as you well know, in the 40s.
And even prior to that, the spectroscopy of
meteors was important work. Well, comets,
I think, have always retained sort of a mysterious
bent to them. Any information that could be
gleaned using astrophysical techniques was
applied. They did work on polarization studies of
comets and spectroscopic work, electric work,
infrared.
Whenever a new technique was developed, it wasn't
long before they would apply it to comets as well as
some other astrophysical objects. I'd like to ask
you your opinions about some things relating to
comets. When do you think photometry became good
enough to actually tell us something about the
comet?
Well, I think there was some excellent work done in
the late 19th century, really. I think that's when
it started.
There were a series of photometric observations
made of comets, and that data is often used even
today in an effort to discern whether comets are
fading as a function of time or whether they're
Spectroscopy
Continuous spectra, continuous spectra,
however the photography came in and showed
Brown-Huckaboo and certainly confirmed the
polarization work that showed the polar dust. And
then, of course, the first, I guess, Huggins saw
emission law. But for a long time it was held up, I
guess, because, in fact, a lot of mechanics hadn't
been invented and people didn't know what to make.
That's right. Yeah, that's true. There was a lot of
spectroscopic work done, again, in the late 19th
century, early 20th century, but apart from a
couple of initial breakthroughs where they, was
it C2? Yeah. And that was, you mentioned that
Huggins was lucky, or is it you? Well, that's true.
I didn't mention it, but yeah, the C2 lines were
some of the, a couple of the lines that he actually
could identify without any knowledge of the, And
he did. He actually had a carbon arc made through
the telescope, and he practically analyzed that
and looked at some emission lines from Comets and
correctly identified these lines as due to
carbon. But that was the exception. As you noted,
the quantum mechanics didn't come in until the
very 20th century, and it was then that all of these
spectral lines and bands that have been noted were
properly identified. You've done this in your
book, but this is for the record. Could you kind of
give a short summary of how cometary astronomy
developed from, say, 1860 Well, in terms of
motions
of comets, you noted that Encke detected these
so-called non-gravitational effects in the
early 19th century with the comet that now bears
his name, and of course he initially attributed
this to the the drag effects of the ether. And so
that was a bit of a backwards step. And that result
was so well verified and in place that the notion of
this interplanetary ether continued well into
the late 19th century because of that. So that was a
bit of a step backwards. Another step backwards, I
think, was the, well, An unfortunate
relationship between the observed meteor
showers in the 1860s, the Leonids and Perseids
were identified by Schiaparelli and a few others
as being due to their parent comets, the Comet
Swift tunnel, the Temple Tunnel. And this
association between meteor streams and comets
sort of evolved into the flying dust bank model of a
comet. And that was unfortunate. The association
of meteor streams with comets was very fortunate.
That was a major step forward. But the further
inference that somehow comets were clouds of
particles flying in formation was a notion that
held center stage to the 1950 high-speed
conglomerate model.
Then there was some
work done
in the 1900s and 1901
on light pressure and the fact that light pressure
could affect dust particles. Of course, Amelia
Lynn lends itself to the notion of dust-tales
being formed by the pressure of sunlight. It
wasn't until many years later that the correct
explanation for the ion-tales was denoted as, for
many years, light pressure was vibrated, for the
most part. was applied in an attempt to explain the
Type I, Type II, and Type III tails. Now, the Type I
was the dust tail, and the Type II tails were the ion
tails. But, of course, he lumped them together and
tried to explain both with light pressure and, of
course, was unsuccessful. at least the type 1 dust
tails were
successfully explained by the pressure of
sunlight and it wasn't until the solar wind notion
was put forward by Biermann and also around 1950
that the charge exchange mechanism between
cometary ions and the solar plasma
fails radiating outward from the sun at 400
kilometers a second was successfully used to
explain the ion fails. You had mentioned the
emission lines from the spectra were noted as
early as, I think it was 1880s, 1860s, 1870s,
1880s. Emission lines, emission bands were
detected and it was generally assumed that these
were,
well, some of them were carbon and were identified
as such, but most of them were simply noted as
mysterious
features that couldn't be identified chemically
because the quantum mechanics hadn't been
invented yet. Now, in terms of there
was all kinds of attempts to do this
photometrically, but the problem there was that
the dust contamination to the photometric
solutions was always a problem, and so these
things were considered to be far larger than they
really were. Elizabeth Romer did some
interesting work back in the 60s where she very
carefully tried to subtract, or she took and
derived
some fairly decent estimates for the sizes of the
nucleons themselves, but even her estimates
were somewhat contaminated by the dust. And it
really wasn't until the 70s when there was a
reasonable estimate And pretty much they lie in
the range from 5 to 10 to 20 kilometers, that range.
I have a personal bone to pick, so I'll pick it.
Well, not pick, but to emphasize. A long time
before they identified water vapor as a major
constituent of comets, for some time before, it
became kind of popular to think that they were,
even though we didn't have the evidence. Do you
remember when that happened, or did you find it out
when you were working on your book? Well, of
course, Fred Whipple, in his model of 1950,
postulated water is one of the major icy
constituents that warms methane and ammonia.
Now, the next step forward in terms of water ice, I
think, was taken with the the
above-the-atmosphere rocket flight, they were
doing ultraviolet observations of the enormous
clouds of hydrogen surrounding these clouds.
That was a big surprise to everyone, just to see how
large these clouds of light and alpha clouds of
hydrogen were. And, of course, it wasn't that big a
leap to note that one way of getting these enormous
clouds of hydrogen to
vaporize water and ionize it. So that was another
step toward water and vaporizing. And then there
was some, of course, the commonality of flybys,
maybe six of the others, because they directly
observed water vaporization. But there were some
pretty strong hints even before that, well before
that, about water vaporization. How
would you contrast planetary astronomy in 1970
with what
it is today in 1974? Well, in 1970, I just got out of
school, and it was sort of the Apollo program
that had pumped a lot of interest and a lot of money
into the field. And so it was the heyday. It wasn't
the last day. In
the
70s, there
was
a wave of enthusiasm
because of . There's no question . when
you're riding the coattails. To a certain extent,
planetary astronomy isn't riding the coattails
of manned space like even today. But I think the
Apollo program certainly sparked it. And then the
Viking missions were exciting because of the hope
of finding some sort of life on Mars. The Voyager
program was extraordinary. of
each
new planet
as the Voyagers want to have . But the Vikings and
the Voyagers are come and gone, and now we're back
to almost where we were prior to the Apollo
program, not in terms of , but in terms of not having
any major missions to explore except for . What
do you think the state of planetary astronomy
today is, and what's your guess for the immediate
future, the next five or ten years? Well,
I'm not too confident that the next five or ten
years, frankly, From my limited point of view,
being at JPL, there is Cassini,
which is supporting a quarter of the laboratory.
And there seems to be a perception, really, that
we're going now into smaller emissions,
hopefully more frequently. Smaller, better,
faster, cheaper. The motto that Stan Gold has been
And
so
from JPL's point of view, where we once had a
monopoly, of course, that's no longer the case. So
you've got universities participating in the
discovery program. You've got APL. You've got DOD
participating in some of that. So in terms of a JPL
employee in planetary science, it's going to be a
little rough. Going back 25 years ago, there was
no such journal as the American Astronomical
Society, or I should say 30 years ago, and there was
no division for planetary sciences. Now
planetary workers have their own journals and
their own division of the American Astronomical
Society. Do you think those two developments,
both as it relates to planetary astronomy and
astronomy in general, were good, bad, or just
inevitable? Oh, they're very good and
inevitable.
The Division of Planetary Sciences is extremely
active. It's by far my favorite
meeting, even more interesting to me than this
one, the Division of Planetary Sciences, DPS
encompasses
not only dynamics, but it has physics, you have
spectroscopy, you have words, you have dynamics.
It's a great place to get together with people with
diverse backgrounds. It's marvelous. And I'm
extremely well-attended to it. It's huge. It's
very private. And Icarus, likewise, has done a
marvelous job. Where
do you think planetary science would be today in
the USA? I hesitate
to think where we would be
without
NASA. Again, the Apollo program, I think, kicked
us into high gear. In fact, you could make an
argument for NASA, the space program, actually
giving birth to the planetary science community
up in North America. As
you're
probably aware, before there was a NASA A fair
amount of research was sponsored by the
Department of Defense, Stellar and Galactic
Astronomy by the Office of Naval Research, but
planetary and lunar was by the Air Force. There's
talk of doing away with NASA. What would your
opinion be of working for the Air Force? Actually,
I am working for the Air Force. At the moment, I have
a small contract working on Dave Rappaport's
summer development for common ground. I don't
think
that would be a healthy situation. The Air Force
really
has a
very limited interest in monetary science and
science in general. I don't see that being an
option. doing away with NASA and transferring
it to Air Force or whatever DOD branches would be
very wise. How do you think NASA handles
management today and when you first started
thinking about it or experiencing it? Well, the
management of scientific contracts. Oh, I see.
Well, I've had a contract with NASA. under the rtop
program i've never had a problem there's always
the problem that the money available is far
less than what is required
but that's a continual problem because even if the
money doesn't decrease the number of people
buying that thing is increasing The
science management at NASA has been, in my opinion
at least, pretty good. I suspect that's not a
popular opinion. I may be the only one holding that
opinion, but I have never had a problem with the
review of the proposals,
I've
had a very positive reaction.
All right, we've visited all the planets with
Pluto at least once now. We got to look at their
satellites and so forth. And no trace of life or
anything approaching it has been found anywhere
in the solar system except Earth. Do you think this
has had an impressing effect on public interest
and budgets for quantitary sites, or not? Well,
initially there was a great deal of talk about
finding a place on Mars, and I think that fueled a
lot of the public interest that led to the
successful biking and the Voyager program. But I
think that the population is sophisticated
enough to realize that that life is something
that's prevalent on Mars or any of the planets that
exist. I'd like to think they're educated enough
to realize that, well, I like to turn it around,
that why is it that life has been about Earth and
hasn't yet been discovered anywhere else? That,
to me, is everybody's exciting finding life
elsewhere. The thought that we're possibly a
fluke. of
interstellar accidents
is maybe more interesting ultimately than
planning to land on Mars, which didn't happen. I
think if we're going to relate, or try and regain
the public interest in space, our efforts can't be
focused upon life, because we're going to have to
It's going
to have to be
the expansion
of the discovery of new neighborhoods, new
possibilities, doing this for the next
generation, and finding new resources to explore
the planetary realm first,
and then out from there. So no, I don't think it's .
Since
we don't know if it's going to be an informed guess,
do you think comments are leftovers from the
formation of the solar system or have the ones we
see now been somehow acquired by
ourselves? The consensus view certainly is that
comets are the leftover bits and pieces from the
solar system formation process. I think that's
probably the correct interpretation. If we were
actively acquiring comets from elsewhere, we
would see comets
on parabolic
orbits. We would see hyperbolic orbits. And we
don't. We don't see hyperbolic orbits, strong
anechoic orbits at all. So
yeah, I think kind of the leftovers from the outer
solar system formation process, I mean,
chemically they're very similar to the outer
planets. That's very good. Leftovers from the
inner solar system formation process, they're
very similar. I think that aspect is fairly well be
the case. As
you're well aware, the Division for Planetary
Sciences is quite active in lobbying Congress. Do
you think planetary astronomers have done a good
job in presenting their case to Congress? I think
they've started to lobby, and that's an excellent
start, but we haven't done nearly as much. As you
get older and more cynical, you realize that the
views you held as a youth, that is, the science is so
interesting and physically means that Congress
will see our point of view and appropriate the
necessary funds. It's simply too naive. It didn't
work for higher-engine particle physicists,
that's for sure. No, we have to get in there and we
have to bang on doors. We have to mount... a
write-in campaign for particular issues that we
feel strongly about. We have to get to the
representatives and make sure that they
understand how we feel and just flex our muscles
and throw our weight around it. It's the only way
we're going to make any progress. Do you think
Planetary Astronomers have done a good job in
selling themselves to the public?
It's
almost as if astronomers and scientists don't
have the time to share it with the people who are
paying for their power. We really have dropped the
ball on that part. We
should be out there at the high schools doing
talks. We should be out there at the adult clubs. We
remain in the excitement of our science, the
people who are paying the bills. And as a rule, the
commons and scientists in general don't do that
well, and they don't do it properly. We have guys
like Carl Sagan who do it very well. But we have to
get more of us out there. relay
the excitement of our science to them and every
time they give a talk we should thank them for the
privilege of working for them they really have to
do much here's a personal question what's the best
piece of work well uh i guess it would have to be uh
things not a particular thing but uh What we
do at JPL within my little group is is
when NASA wants to send
a spacecraft by documentary center, by comet
Halley, by asteroid Ida or Gaspra, they have to
know where these objects are in space. So it's our
job to get the necessary reference star catalogs
to experience the observers, generate the
orbital updates and the tremor adaptations and
the air analyses that allow the spacecraft I think
that's the
thing I'm most proud of, is that for every object,
for every comet and asteroid that a spacecraft has
encountered, it was our efforts that told them
where to, where the topics were. We've done a
pretty good job so far. What was the most fun? I
think working during the comet Halley and working
with the Russians. the
Soviets,
as they went in, was a real eye-opener.
And seeing the way they did business, contrasting
it with the way we did business, and their
facilities and computers versus ours, and their
ideas versus ours, I thought that was
fascinating. They really had a marvelous time.
Ever had any misfires or dead ends? I
was
investigating the
motion of asteroid Icarus in 1566. And we knew that
it was affected by relativistic effects, of
course, because it is such an elliptic orbit, it's
such a small, so many directions, just like the
sea. the
orbit
of Mercury rotates
in terms of the gravitational effect, and so does
the orbit of Mercury. And we had put those effects
in our code, and we still had some problems with the
observations, so we solved for some cometary
non-gravitational effects, and that seemed to
take care of things, and so we made the inference
that, yes indeed, this is a comet that is still
outgassing, and And
that
was why these effects were noticeable. Well,
after publishing it, it turns out we had a bug in the
program, and then the relativistic effects were
not being applied at all. And once that bug was
declared, the motion of the attitude was
explained very well without any kind of When
you're sitting on a plane or waiting in
line or something, just an expert who's not a
scientist, finds out what you do for a living,
what's their attitude? Well,
it's a little, I won't say they're awestruck, but
the conversation seems to stop rather
abruptly
when they realized that this person was an
astronomer. They know very little about it, and I
guess they don't know what to talk about next. It's
not a subject that the public is as well versed in,
and that's another problem. We have to make an
effort to get the public up to speed on astronomy
and do fast-breaking science here. What's
the most common question people
ask you? They asked me a question about the
astronomical topics
they've read most recently in the newspaper.
I mean, our science does get a fair amount of press,
especially with respect to the other sciences,
because there's always something new going on. A
new quasar, or a new cometary phenomena, or a
discovery of possible dark matter, There's
always
something exotic on the fringe that sort of brings
a lot of media. That's what they usually ask about.
The most recent discovery they read about in the
newspaper. So it's imperative that we all, no
matter what field we're in, that we all keep
abreast of the entire astronomical
literature. um
that brings up the question of do you have much
contact with stellar and galactic astronomy
types not on a professional level hardly ever
because i mean if you go to the dps You interact with
planetary
science. If you go to the AIS meeting, you interact
with galactic solar astronomers, but not
planetary science. So there's almost a complete
segregation now. Well, it's too late to ask the
participants, so I've been asking planetary
scientists who are around today. Somewhere
between 1900 and World War I, planetary astronomy
died loudly. Who or what killed it? The
new astronomy
killed it. The spectroscopes came online, and the
search for the big question, how big was the
galaxy? Were there island universes apart from
our own? What were the constituents of the stars
and galaxies? What was the age of the universe? The
big question sort of dwarfed .
. .
.
There have been a lot of new discoveries and
insights about the solar system in the last 25
years. What do you think the most important one has
been to
the
public?
To the public? Well, I think the fact that we didn't
find life on Mars is certainly important to the
public. very
aware of what is I
saw a number of people that mentioned the
photograph taken while we were in orbit, the
photograph of the rising sun. The idea that we are
in a very small second-rate planet going around a
very small second-rate sun
If
we go ahead 50 years and look back, that would be the
paradigm in which that would be identified. The
homocentric view that we all have of the earth is
pretty much all there is to it. As
a
planetary
astronomer, what do you think, from your point of
view, of planetary science has been the most
important? Well, from my narrow perspective, I
think Another
paradigm, which recently, the last 10 years,
concerning the low island impact, literally the
impact of one body upon another. When I first
started out in the field, There
was
a feeling that everything
evolved very slowly. There were tremendously
long time scales. In biology, things evolved
according to the Darwinian theories. Very slight
changes were retained if they were helpful. And
likewise in the solar system, things evolved ever
so slowly. But I think we're getting an increasing
realization that uh...
major results will be coming out.